[Music]
when you're prying presents for people
and you're buying all this extra food
you start to really see the amount
that's coming into your life you can
definitely do your sustainability on a
budget at Christmas and if you just make
your purchases much more
well-thought-out you can buy one thing
that really makes a difference to the
person that you're giving it to and also
the planet and you can do that for
certainly less than what you're already
spending money on when you're thinking
of what to get a child at Christmas it's
really important to think about the fact
that they grow so so fast and you don't
want to get from something that's
already outgrown or will be outgrown
after just a few airs so I definitely
recommend sizing up if you're going to
get them close so my advice would be to
recycle you know newspapers and things
like that or kind of craft paper tissue
as you're wrapping paper because of the
nice kind of beautiful bow your presents
can look equally if not nicer with
slightly more creative sustainable
wrapping options I think we're in a
culture where we we visit supermarkets
without thinking we we go online and we
shop without thinking there are a lot of
very interesting small sellers that are
selling a unique products I think it's
just about you know shopping locally and
just seeing what's different rather than
just going online where it's easier I
think to have a more sustainable
Christmas you should not be afraid to
shop secondhand I think there's
sometimes a river stick we're all out
buying secondhand gifts but you can find
some really amazing things and trouser
shops especially like books and things
like that so don't be afraid to shop in
shop secondhand and spend a little bit
longer looking forget
we using decorations every year is
really important to buy stuff that you
really like and you want to use every
year rather than throwing away think
about how much footprint and impact
you're having on the environment but
also wouldn't it be nice if you kind of
gave a gift that had a story it's a
better gift to give something to
somebody that is going to last for a
long time it's not just about
sustainability it's not just about
saving money it's about giving a gift to
somebody that is going to really mean
something for the rest of their life you
can gift food you can make food never
throw your leftovers away the leftovers
from your your roasts are the best part
you can have the trimmings from all of
the vegetables and the leftover bone
from the hunk of meat or whatever that
you've done put it all in a big pot of
water make your broth and it'll have all
of this flavor from all of the leftovers
that you've got without wasting any
fresh veg and then you've got it for
soups risottos anything we'll make that
be my recommendations I think really
having a look at what's in the home and
trying to read you use a recycle it
personally at home you've been recycling
pinecones painting them with paint and
all you have in the home finding pace
like color paper making our own
decorations it's really important to
just be thoughtful and get curious
really gonna question your Christmas
traditions and how sustainable they are
and if there's like spots you can make
or alternate
do I think state of it he's got quite a
bad reputation oh I've got to be vegan
and got to be all of this
just about reducing slowly and
have to be more environmentally friendly
spend time with people like time is your
most valuable asset and it doesn't cost
anything it doesn't create anything just
have a nice time together I think it's
important that people buy stuff that has
a give back it sends a really great
message and live in five ten years time
it becomes a complete norm for all of
these products to do that I think the
world have been in a great place my tip
would be not to get overwhelmed with
sustainability I know it is new for a
lot of people and small steps are what
matters don't get overwhelmed with
trying to make every single thing
sustainable because this year you'll do
a few things and then next year you can
do some more it's just really just be
mindful about your own well-being and
don't get too stressed about it
you